EU AI ACT — REGULATION (EU) 2024/1689 — RECITALS 1-81 (Preamble, Official Journal 12.7.2024)
Source: https://eur-lex.europa.eu/eli/reg/2024/1689/oj/eng

(1) The purpose of this Regulation is to improve the functioning of the internal market by laying down a uniform legal framework in particular for the development, the placing on the market, the putting into service and the use of artificial intelligence systems (AI systems) in the Union, in accordance with Union values, to promote the uptake of human centric and trustworthy artificial intelligence (AI) while ensuring a high level of protection of health, safety, fundamental rights as enshrined in the Charter of Fundamental Rights of the European Union (the 'Charter'), including democracy, the rule of law and environmental protection, to protect against the harmful effects of AI systems in the Union, and to support innovation. This Regulation ensures the free movement, cross-border, of AI-based goods and services, thus preventing Member States from imposing restrictions on the development, marketing and use of AI systems, unless explicitly authorised by this Regulation.

(12) The notion of 'AI system' in this Regulation should be clearly defined and should be closely aligned with the work of international organisations working on AI. A key characteristic of AI systems is their capability to infer. This capability to infer refers to the process of obtaining the outputs, such as predictions, content, recommendations, or decisions, which can influence physical and virtual environments, and to a capability of AI systems to derive models or algorithms, or both, from inputs or data. AI systems are designed to operate with varying levels of autonomy, meaning that they have some degree of independence of actions from human involvement.

(13) The notion of 'deployer' referred to in this Regulation should be interpreted as any natural or legal person, including a public authority, agency or other body, using an AI system under its authority, except where the AI system is used in the course of a personal non-professional activity.

(26) In order to introduce a proportionate and effective set of binding rules for AI systems, a clearly defined risk-based approach should be followed. That approach should tailor the type and content of such rules to the intensity and scope of the risks that AI systems can generate. It is therefore necessary to prohibit certain unacceptable AI practices, to lay down requirements for high-risk AI systems and obligations for the relevant operators, and to lay down transparency obligations for certain AI systems.

(29) AI-enabled manipulative techniques can be used to persuade persons to engage in unwanted behaviours, or to deceive them by nudging them into decisions in a way that subverts and impairs their autonomy, decision-making and free choices. The placing on the market, the putting into service or the use of certain AI systems with the objective to or the effect of materially distorting human behaviour, whereby significant harms are likely to occur, are particularly dangerous and should therefore be prohibited. Such AI systems deploy subliminal components such as audio, image, video stimuli that persons cannot perceive, or other manipulative or deceptive techniques that subvert or impair a person's autonomy, decision-making or free choice.

(30) Biometric categorisation systems that are based on natural persons' biometric data, such as an individual person's face or fingerprint, to deduce or infer an individuals' political opinions, trade union membership, religious or philosophical beliefs, race, sex life or sexual orientation should be prohibited.

(31) AI systems providing social scoring of natural persons by public or private actors may lead to discriminatory outcomes and the exclusion of certain groups. They may violate the right to dignity and non-discrimination and the values of equality and justice. AI systems entailing such unacceptable scoring practices and leading to such detrimental or unfavourable outcomes should therefore be prohibited.

(32) The use of AI systems for 'real-time' remote biometric identification of natural persons in publicly accessible spaces for the purpose of law enforcement is particularly intrusive to the rights and freedoms of the concerned persons, to the extent that it may affect the private life of a large part of the population, evoke a feeling of constant surveillance and indirectly dissuade the exercise of the freedom of assembly and other fundamental rights.

(33) The use of those systems for the purpose of law enforcement should therefore be prohibited, except in exhaustively listed and narrowly defined situations, where the use is strictly necessary to achieve a substantial public interest, the importance of which outweighs the risks. Those situations involve the search for certain victims of crime including missing persons; certain threats to the life or to the physical safety of natural persons or of a terrorist attack; and the localisation or identification of perpetrators or suspects of serious criminal offences punishable by a custodial sentence of at least four years.

(42) In line with the presumption of innocence, natural persons in the Union should always be judged on their actual behaviour. Risk assessments carried out with regard to natural persons in order to assess the likelihood of their offending or to predict the occurrence of an actual or potential criminal offence based solely on profiling them or on assessing their personality traits and characteristics should be prohibited.

(43) The placing on the market, the putting into service for that specific purpose, or the use of AI systems that create or expand facial recognition databases through the untargeted scraping of facial images from the internet or CCTV footage, should be prohibited.

(44) There are serious concerns about the scientific basis of AI systems aiming to identify or infer emotions. Therefore, the placing on the market, the putting into service, or the use of AI systems intended to be used to detect the emotional state of individuals in situations related to the workplace and education should be prohibited. That prohibition should not cover AI systems placed on the market strictly for medical or safety reasons.

(46) High-risk AI systems should only be placed on the Union market, put into service or used if they comply with certain mandatory requirements. AI systems identified as high-risk should be limited to those that have a significant harmful impact on the health, safety and fundamental rights of persons in the Union.

(48) The extent of the adverse impact caused by the AI system on the fundamental rights protected by the Charter is of particular relevance when classifying an AI system as high risk. Those rights include the right to human dignity, respect for private and family life, protection of personal data, freedom of expression and information, the right to non-discrimination, the right to education, consumer protection, workers' rights, and the rights of persons with disabilities.

(52) As regards stand-alone AI systems, it is appropriate to classify them as high-risk if, in light of their intended purpose, they pose a high risk of harm to the health and safety or the fundamental rights of persons, taking into account both the severity of the possible harm and its probability of occurrence, and they are used in a number of specifically pre-defined areas specified in this Regulation.

(53) There may be specific cases in which AI systems referred to in pre-defined high-risk areas do not lead to a significant risk of harm because they do not materially influence the decision-making or do not harm those interests substantially: e.g. an AI system intended to perform a narrow procedural task, an AI system intended to improve the result of a previously completed human activity, an AI system intended to detect decision-making patterns or deviations, or an AI system intended to perform a task that is only preparatory to an assessment. A provider who considers a listed-area system is not high-risk on this basis must document the assessment before placing it on the market and register the system in the EU database.

(54) As biometric data constitutes a special category of personal data, it is appropriate to classify as high-risk several critical-use cases of biometric systems: remote biometric identification systems, biometric categorisation according to sensitive attributes, and emotion recognition systems not otherwise prohibited. This excludes biometric verification/authentication systems and systems used solely for cybersecurity or personal data protection purposes.

(55) It is appropriate to classify as high-risk the AI systems intended to be used as safety components in the management and operation of critical digital infrastructure, road traffic and the supply of water, gas, heating and electricity, since their failure or malfunctioning may put at risk the life and health of persons at large scale.

(56) AI systems used in education or vocational training, in particular for determining access or admission, for assigning persons to educational institutions, for evaluating learning outcomes, or for monitoring prohibited behaviour of students during tests, should be classified as high-risk AI systems.

(57) AI systems used in employment, workers management and access to self-employment — in particular for recruitment and selection, for decisions affecting promotion and termination of work-related contracts, for allocating tasks, and for monitoring or evaluation of persons in work-related contractual relationships — should also be classified as high-risk.

(58) AI systems used for determining whether essential public assistance benefits and services (healthcare, social security, social services) should be granted, denied, reduced, revoked or reclaimed should be classified as high-risk. AI systems used to evaluate the credit score or creditworthiness of natural persons should also be classified as high-risk, as should systems for risk assessment and pricing of health and life insurance, and systems used to evaluate/classify emergency calls and dispatch emergency response services.

(59) It is appropriate to classify as high-risk a number of AI systems intended to be used in the law enforcement context, including systems for assessing the risk of a natural person becoming a victim of criminal offences (e.g. polygraphs), for evaluating the reliability of evidence, and for profiling in the course of detection, investigation or prosecution of criminal offences (where not otherwise prohibited).

(60) AI systems intended to be used by competent public authorities in migration, asylum and border control management — for assessing risks posed by persons entering a Member State, for examining asylum/visa/residence applications, and for detecting or identifying persons in this context (except verification of travel documents) — should be classified as high-risk.

(61) AI systems intended to be used by a judicial authority to assist in researching and interpreting facts and the law and applying the law to a concrete set of facts should be classified as high-risk, given their potentially significant impact on democracy, the rule of law, and the right to a fair trial. The final decision-making must remain a human-driven activity.

(62) AI systems intended to be used to influence the outcome of an election or referendum or the voting behaviour of natural persons should be classified as high-risk, except systems whose output natural persons are not directly exposed to, such as tools used to organise political campaigns administratively.

(64) To mitigate the risks from high-risk AI systems, certain mandatory requirements should apply, taking into account the intended purpose and context of use, according to a risk-management system established by the provider.

(65) The risk-management system should consist of a continuous, iterative process planned and run throughout the entire lifecycle of a high-risk AI system, aimed at identifying and mitigating relevant risks to health, safety and fundamental rights, and should be regularly reviewed and updated.

(67) High-quality data sets for training, validation and testing require appropriate data governance and management practices. Data sets should be relevant, sufficiently representative, and to the best extent possible free of errors and complete, with specific attention to the mitigation of possible biases likely to affect health and safety or lead to discrimination prohibited under Union law.

(71) Having comprehensible information on how high-risk AI systems have been developed and how they perform throughout their lifetime is essential to enable traceability, verify compliance, and facilitate post-market monitoring. This requires keeping records and technical documentation containing information on the system's general characteristics, capabilities, limitations, algorithms, data, training/testing/validation processes, and the risk-management system.

(72) Transparency should be required for high-risk AI systems before they are placed on the market or put into service. High-risk AI systems should be accompanied by instructions of use covering characteristics, capabilities and limitations, known and foreseeable circumstances that may lead to risk, and relevant human oversight measures.

(73) High-risk AI systems should be designed so natural persons can oversee their functioning. Appropriate human oversight measures should be identified by the provider before placing on the market, ensuring the system is subject to in-built operational constraints, is responsive to the human operator, and that those assigned oversight have the necessary competence, training and authority.

(74) High-risk AI systems should perform consistently throughout their lifecycle and meet an appropriate level of accuracy, robustness and cybersecurity, in light of their intended purpose and the generally acknowledged state of the art. Expected performance metrics should be declared in the accompanying instructions of use.

(75) Technical robustness is a key requirement for high-risk AI systems. They should be resilient to harmful or undesirable behaviour resulting from limitations within the system or its operating environment, using technical solutions such as fail-safe mechanisms.

(76) Cybersecurity plays a crucial role in ensuring AI systems are resilient against attempts to alter their use, behaviour, or performance by malicious third parties, including AI-specific threats such as data poisoning and adversarial attacks.

(79) A specific natural or legal person, defined as the provider, takes responsibility for the placing on the market or putting into service of a high-risk AI system, regardless of whether that person designed or developed the system.

(81) The provider should establish a sound quality management system, ensure the accomplishment of the required conformity assessment procedure, draw up the relevant documentation, and establish a robust post-market monitoring system.
